About query optimization and considerations for scaling (#182)
crate/cratedb-guide: docs/performance/optimization.rst

.. _performance-optimization:

########################
 Query Optimization 101
########################

.. _filtering-early:

**************************************
 Do all filtering as soon as possible
**************************************

Sometimes it may be tempting to define some VIEWs, some CTEs, do some JOINs, and
only filter results at the end, but in this context the optimizer may lose track
of how the fields we are filtering on relate to the indexes on the actual
tables.

Whenever there is an opportunity to filter data immediately next to the ``FROM``
clause try to narrow down results as early as possible.

See `using common table expressions to speed up queries`_ for an example.

.. _minimise-result-sets:

*************************
 Avoid large result sets
*************************

Be aware of the number of rows you are returning in a ``SELECT`` query.
Analytical databases, such as CrateDB, excel at processing large data sets and

> returning small to medium-sized result sets. Serializing, transporting them over

Author: I need to credit @hammerhead  for this wording

     device_data.device_name,
     device_data.reading_value
   FROM device_data
   INNER JOIN factory_metadata ON device_data.factory_id=factory_metadata.factory_id
   WHERE reading_time BETWEEN '2024-01-01' AND '2025-01-01'
   LIMIT 10;

do:

.. code:: sql

   WITH filtered_device_data AS (
      SELECT
            device_data.factory_id,
            device_data.device_name,
            device_data.reading_value
      FROM device_data
      WHERE
            reading_time BETWEEN '2024-12-01' AND '2025-01-01'
            /* we are sure one month of data is sufficient to find 10 results and it may help with partition pruning */
      LIMIT 10
   )
   SELECT
     factory_metadata.factory_name,
     filtered_device_data.device_name,
     filtered_device_data.reading_value
   FROM filtered_device_data
   INNER JOIN factory_metadata ON filtered_device_data.factory_id=factory_metadata.factory_id;

.. _only-sort-when-needed:

****************************
 Only sort data when needed
****************************

Indexing in CrateDB is optimized to support filtering and aggregations without
requiring expensive defragmentation operations, but it is not optimized for
sorting​.

> Maintaining a sorted index would slow down ingestion​ and Redshift and other
> analytical database systems like Cassandra make similar trade-offs​.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Maintaining a sorted index would slow down ingestion, that's why​ other analytical
database systems like Cassandra and Redshift make similar trade-offs​.
```

> This means that when an ``ORDER BY`` is requested the whole dataset comes in
> memory in a node and data is sorted there and then, hence it is important to not
> request ``ORDER BY`` operations when not actually needed, there is, of course,
> no problem sorting a few thousand rows in the final stage of a ``SELECT`` but we
> need to avoid requesting sort operations over millions of rows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that when an ``ORDER BY`` operation is requested, the whole dataset
needs to be loaded into the main memory on the relevant cluster node to be sorted.
That is why it is important to not request ``ORDER BY`` operations when not actually
needed, and most importantly, not on tables of large cardinalities without aggregating
records beforehand. On the other hand, of course it is no problem to sort a few
thousand rows in the final stage of a ``SELECT`` operation, but we need to avoid
requesting sort operations over millions of rows.
```

Consider leveraging filters and aggregations like ``max_by`` and ``min_by`` to

> get the desired results limiting the scope of ``ORDER BY`` operations or
> avoiding them altogether.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
limit the scope of ``ORDER BY`` operations, or
avoid them altogether when possible.
```

So for instance instead of:

.. code:: sql

   SELECT reading_time,reading_value
   FROM device_data
   WHERE reading_time BETWEEN '2024-01-01' AND '2025-01-01'
   ORDER BY reading_time DESC
   LIMIT 10;

use:

.. code:: sql

   SELECT reading_time,reading_value
   FROM device_data
   WHERE reading_time BETWEEN '2024-12-20' AND '2025-01-01'
   ORDER BY reading_time DESC
   LIMIT 10;

.. _filter-with-array-expressions:

***************************************************************************
 Use filters with array expressions when filtering on the output of UNNEST
***************************************************************************

> On denormalized data sets you may have records with an array of objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On denormalized data sets, you may observe records including columns
storing arrays of objects.
```

> You may want to unnest the array in a subquery or CTE and later filter on a
> property of the OBJECTs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may want to unnest the array in a subquery or CTE and later filter on a
property of the OBJECTs.

The next statement will result in every row in the table (not filtered
with other conditions) being read and unnested, to check if it meets
the criteria on ``field1``.
```

.. code:: sql

   SELECT *
   FROM (
      SELECT UNNEST(my_array_of_objects) obj
      FROM my_table
   )
   WHERE obj['field1'] = 1;

> Just written like that this will result in every row in the table (not filtered
> with other conditions) being read and unnested to check if it meets the criteria
> on ``field1``, but CrateDB can do a lot better than this if we add an additional
> condition like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, CrateDB can do a lot better than this if we add an additional condition
like this:
```

.. code:: sql

   SELECT *
   FROM (
      SELECT unnest(my_array_of_objects) obj
      FROM my_table
      WHERE 1 = ANY my_array_of_objects['field1']
   )
   WHERE obj['field1'] = 1;

CrateDB leverages indexes to only unnest the relevant records from ``my_table``
which can make a huge difference.

.. _format-as-last-step:

******************************
 Format output as a last step
******************************

> In many cases, data may be stored in an efficient format but we want to
> transform it to make it more human-readable in the output of the query, we may
> use `scalar functions`_ such as ``date_format`` or ``timezone``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In many cases, data may be stored in an efficient format, but we want to
transform it to make it more human-readable in the output of the query.
To accomodate such situations, we may use `scalar functions`_ such as
``date_format`` or ``timezone``.
```

Sometimes queries apply these transformations in an intermediate step and later
do further operations like filtering on the transformed values.

> The CrateDB optimizer is actually very good at seeing through many of these
> situations and still using indexes on the original data. But there is always a
> risk that something particular in the query prevents this from happening and we
> end up applying the transformation on thousands or millions of records that
> later will be discarded. So whenever makes sense we want to only apply these
> transformations when we have already worked out the final result set to be sent
> back to the client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CrateDB's query optimizer attempts to determine the most efficient way to
execute a given query by considering the possible query plans. Based on
the query scenario/situation, it is always aiming to use existing indexes on
the original data for maximum efficiency.

However, there is always a chance that some particular clause in the query
expression prevents the optimizer from selecting an optimal plan, ending up
applying the transformation on thousands or millions of records that later
would be discarded anyway. So, whenever it makes sense, we want to make
sure these transformations are only applied after the database has already
worked out the final result set to be sent back to the client.
```

**********************************************************************
 Replace CASE in expressions used for filtering, JOINs, grouping, etc
**********************************************************************

It is not always obvious to the optimizer what we may be trying to do with a
``CASE`` expression (see for instance `Shortcut CASE evaluation Issue 16022`_).

If you are using CASE expression for “formatting” see the previous point about
formatting output as late as possible,

but if you are using a CASE expression as part of a filter of other operation
consider replacing it with an equivalent expression, for instance:

.. code:: sql

   SELECT SUM(a) as count_greater_than_10,...
   FROM (
     SELECT CASE WHEN field1 > 10 THEN 1 ELSE 0 END
           , ...
     FROM mytable
     ...
   ) subquery
   ...;

can be rewritten as

.. code:: sql

   SELECT COUNT(field1) FILTER (WHERE field1 > 10) as count_greater_than_10
   FROM mytable;

And

.. code:: text

   SELECT *
   FROM mytable
   WHERE
     CASE
           WHEN $1 = 'ALL COUNTRIES' THEN true
           WHEN $1 = mytable.country AND $2 = 'ALL CITIES' THEN true
           ELSE $1 = mytable.country AND $2 = mytable.city

>      END;

Reviewer: Hi. I'd like to emphasize this spot, because it is where currently the Pygments SQL formatter fails.

Reviewer: Using the `plpgsql` lexer is the right choice here.

```shell
uv pip install pygments
```
```shell
pygmentize -L
```

Reviewer: Those are all lexers for SQL variants available in Pygments.

```shell
uv pip install pygments
```
```shell
pygmentize -L
```
```
pygmentize -L --json | jq '.lexers | with_entries( select(.key | test("sql"; "i") ))' | yq --input-format json
```
```yaml
GSQL:
  aliases:
    - gsql
  filenames:
    - '*.gsql'
  mimetypes: []
GoogleSQL:
  aliases:
    - googlesql
    - zetasql
  filenames:
    - '*.googlesql'
    - '*.googlesql.sql'
  mimetypes:
    - text/x-google-sql
    - text/x-google-sql-aux
MySQL:
  aliases:
    - mysql
  filenames: []
  mimetypes:
    - text/x-mysql
PL/pgSQL:
  aliases:
    - plpgsql
  filenames: []
  mimetypes:
    - text/x-plpgsql
PostgreSQL console (psql):
  aliases:
    - psql
    - postgresql-console
    - postgres-console
  filenames: []
  mimetypes:
    - text/x-postgresql-psql
PostgreSQL EXPLAIN dialect:
  aliases:
    - postgres-explain
  filenames:
    - '*.explain'
  mimetypes:
    - text/x-postgresql-explain
PostgreSQL SQL dialect:
  aliases:
    - postgresql
    - postgres
  filenames: []
  mimetypes:
    - text/x-postgresql
SQL+Jinja:
  aliases:
    - sql+jinja
  filenames:
    - '*.sql'
    - '*.sql.j2'
    - '*.sql.jinja2'
  mimetypes: []
SQL:
  aliases:
    - sql
  filenames:
    - '*.sql'
  mimetypes:
    - text/x-sql
sqlite3con:
  aliases:
    - sqlite3
  filenames:
    - '*.sqlite3-console'
  mimetypes:
    - text/x-sqlite3-console
Transact-SQL:
  aliases:
    - tsql
    - t-sql
  filenames:
    - '*.sql'
  mimetypes:
    - text/x-tsql
```

Author: That worked, thank you

can be rewritten as

.. code:: text

   SELECT *
   FROM mytable
   WHERE ($1 = 'ALL COUNTRIES')
   OR ($1 = mytable.country AND $2 = 'ALL CITIES')

>    OR ($1 = mytable.country AND $2 = mytable.city)

Reviewer: That is another spot.

 Use groupings instead of DISTINCT
***********************************

(Reference: `Issue 13818`_)

.. code:: sql

   SELECT DISTINCT country FROM customers;

use

.. code:: sql

   SELECT country FROM customers GROUP BY country;

and instead of

.. code:: sql

   SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT a) FROM t;

use

.. code:: sql

   SELECT COUNT(a)
   FROM (
           SELECT a
           FROM t
           GROUP BY a
           ) tmp;

.. _subqueries-instead-groups:

********************************************************************
 Use subqueries instead of GROUP BY if the groups are already known
********************************************************************

Consider the following query:

.. code:: sql

   SELECT customerid, SUM(order_amount) AS total
   FROM customer_orders
   GROUP BY customerid;

This looks simple but to execute it CrateDB needs to keep the full result set in
memory for all groups.

If we already know what the groups will be we can use correlated subqueries
instead:

.. code:: sql

   SELECT customerid,
     (SELECT SUM(order_amount)
      FROM customer_orders
      WHERE customer_orders.customerid = customers.customerid
     ) AS total

>    FROM customers;

Reviewer: Contrary to the two samples above, this spot, including less advanced SQL, is well understood by Pygments.

.. _batch-operations:

******************

>  Batch operations

Reviewer: Maybe call the headline like what's inside? Otherwise, "batch operations" will easily be read differently, like I was just doing it, expecting to see traditional database batched inserted operations instead.

```suggestion
 Batch approach
```

Maybe even extend the headline to say "Batch approach for `UPDATE` and `INSERT ... FROM ... SELECT` operations", to make it clearer, if that's not too long?

of doing them all in one go, adopt a batch approach where the operations are
done on groups of records each time.

So for instance instead of doing:

.. code:: sql

   UPDATE mytable SET field1=field1+1;

do

.. code:: shell

   for id in {1..100}; do
           crash -c "UPDATE mytable SET field1=field1+1 WHERE customer_id=$id;"
   done

.. _pagination-filters:

****************************************
 Paginate on filters instead of results
****************************************

For instance instead of

.. code:: sql

   SELECT deviceid, AVG(field1)
   FROM device_data
   GROUP BY deviceid
   LIMIT 1000 OFFSET 5000;

We can do something like

.. code:: sql

   WITH devices AS (
     SELECT deviceid
     FROM devices
     LIMIT 5 OFFSET 25
   )
   SELECT deviceid, AVG(field1)
   FROM device_data
   WHERE device_data.deviceid IN (SELECT devices.deviceid FROM devices)
   GROUP BY deviceid;

.. _staging-tables:

*****************************************************************************
 Use staging tables for intermediate results if you are doing a lot of JOINs
*****************************************************************************

> If you have many CTEs or VIEWs and need to JOIN these in some cases it can be
> effective to store the intermediate results from these into dedicated tables and
> then use these tables, while there is a cost in writing to disk and reading data
> back we can benefit from indexing and from giving the optimizer more
> straightforward execution plans that it can optimize for parallel execution
> using multiple nodes in the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have many CTEs or VIEWs with a need to JOIN them, it can be benefical
to query them individually, store intermediate results into dedicated tables, and
then use these tables for JOINing.

While there is a cost in writing to disk and reading data back, the whole operation
can benefit from indexing and from giving the optimizer more straightforward
execution plans, to enable it optimizing for better parallel execution using
multiple cluster nodes.
```

.. _select-star:

********************
 Avoid ``SELECT *``
********************

CrateDB is a columnar database. The fewer columns you specify in a ``SELECT``
clause, the less data CrateDB needs to read from disk.

.. code:: sql

   -- Avoid selecting all columns
   SELECT *
   FROM customers

   -- Instead select explicitly the subset of columns you need
   SELECT customerid, country
   FROM customers

.. _consider-generated-columns:

****************************
 Consider generated columns
****************************

> If you frequently find yourself extracting information from fields and then
> using this extracted data on filters or aggregation it can be good to consider

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you frequently find yourself extracting information from fields and then
using this extracted data on filters or aggregations, it can be good to consider
```

doing this operation on ingestion with a `generated column`_, this way the value
we need for filtering and aggregations can be indexed.

See `Using regex comparisons and other features for inspection of logs`_ for an
example.

.. _udf-right-context:

*****************************************************************************************
 Be mindful of UDFs, leverage them in the right contexts, but only in the right contexts
*****************************************************************************************

> UDFs run on a javascript virtual machine and on a single thread, so they can
> have an impact on performance.
> 
> Also once we pass a value through an UDF the engine will have to work with the
> results in memory and will not be able to leverage indexes on the underlying
> fields anymore so the general considerations about delaying formatting as much
> as possible apply.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using user-defined functions (UDFs), two important details relevant for
performance aspects need to be considered.

1. Once records or values will be processed by an UDF, the database engine will
   need to load results into memory, and will not be able to leverage indexes
   any longer. In this spirit, please apply the relevant general considerations
   about delaying formatting as much as possible.

2. UDFs run on a JavaScript virtual machine on a single thread, so they can have
   an impact on performance.
```

However, some operations may be more straightforward to do in JavaScript than
SQL.

.. _positive-filters:

*******************************************************************
 Prefer positive filter expressions to negative filter expressions
*******************************************************************

> Positive filter expressions can directly leverage indexing, sometimes the
> optimizer may be able to rewrite a negative expression to still use indexes but

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Positive filter expressions can directly leverage indexing. With negative
expressions, the optimizer **may** be able to rewrite it to still use indexes, but
```

this may not always happen and the optimizer might not rewrite the query
optimally. Explicitly using positive conditions removes ambiguity and ensures
the most efficient path is chosen.

So instead of:

.. code:: sql

   SELECT
     customerid,
     status
   FROM customers_table
   WHERE NOT (customerid <= 2) AND NOT (status = 'inactive');

We can rewrite this as:

.. code:: sql

   SELECT
     customerid,
     status
   FROM customers_table
   WHERE customerid > 3 AND status = 'active';

.. _use-null-or-empty:

******************************************************************************
 Use the special null_or_empty function with OBJECTs and ARRAYs when relevant
******************************************************************************

CrateDB has a special scalar function called null_or_empty_ , using this in

> filter conditions against OBJECTs and ARRAYs is much faster that look for ``IS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
filter conditions against OBJECTs and ARRAYs is much faster than to look for ``IS
```

> filter conditions against OBJECTs and ARRAYs is much faster that look for ``IS
> NULL`` if accepting empty objects and arrays is acceptable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
filter conditions against OBJECTs and ARRAYs is much faster than using
the ``IS NULL`` clause, if accepting empty objects and arrays is acceptable.
```

So instead of:

.. code:: sql

   SELECT ...
   FROM mytable
   WHERE array_column IS NULL OR array_column = [];

We can rewrite this as:

.. code:: sql

   SELECT ...
   FROM mytable
   WHERE null_or_empty(array_column);

.. _execution-plans:

************************
 Review execution plans
************************

> If a query is slow but still completes in a certain amount of time we can use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a query is slow but still completes in a certain amount of time, we can use
```

> `EXPLAIN ANALYZE`_ to get a detailed execution plan, the main thing to watch for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`EXPLAIN ANALYZE`_ to get a detailed execution plan. The main thing to watch for
```

.. _performance-optimization:

########################
 Query Optimization 101

> ########################

Author: I added a brief introduction to both pages now, please review if you have a minute.

            /* we are sure one month of data is sufficient to find 10 results and it may help with partition pruning */
      LIMIT 10
   )
   SELECT
     factory_metadata.factory_name,
     filtered_device_data.device_name,
     filtered_device_data.reading_value
   FROM filtered_device_data
   INNER JOIN factory_metadata ON filtered_device_data.factory_id=factory_metadata.factory_id;

.. _filter-with-array-expressions:

Use filters with array expressions when filtering on the output of UNNEST
=========================================================================

On denormalized data sets you may have records with an array of objects.

You may want to unnest the array in a subquery or CTE and later filter on a
property of the OBJECTs.

The next statement will result in every row in the table (not filtered
with other conditions) being read and unnested, to check if it meets
the criteria on ``field1``.

.. code:: sql

   SELECT *
   FROM (
      SELECT UNNEST(my_array_of_objects) obj
      FROM my_table
   )
   WHERE obj['field1'] = 1;

However, CrateDB can do a lot better than this if we add an additional condition
like this:

.. code:: sql

   SELECT *
   FROM (

>       SELECT unnest(my_array_of_objects) obj
>       FROM my_table
>       WHERE 1 = ANY (my_array_of_objects['field1'])

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      SELECT UNNEST(my_array_of_objects) obj
      FROM my_table
      WHERE 1 = ANY(my_array_of_objects['field1'])
```

requiring expensive defragmentation operations, but it is not optimized for
sorting​.

Maintaining a sorted index would slow down ingestion, that is why​ other
analytical database systems like Cassandra and Redshift make similar
trade-offs​.

This means that when an ``ORDER BY`` operation is requested, the whole dataset
needs to be loaded into the main memory on the relevant cluster node to be sorted.
That is why it is important to not request ``ORDER BY`` operations when not actually
needed, and most importantly, not on tables of large cardinalities without aggregating
records beforehand. On the other hand, of course it is no problem to sort a few
thousand rows in the final stage of a ``SELECT`` operation, but we need to avoid
requesting sort operations over millions of rows.

Consider leveraging filters and aggregations like ``max_by`` and ``min_by`` to
limit the scope of ``ORDER BY`` operations, or
avoid them altogether when possible.

So for instance instead of:

.. code:: sql

   SELECT reading_time,reading_value
   FROM device_data
   WHERE reading_time BETWEEN '2024-01-01' AND '2025-01-01'
   ORDER BY reading_time DESC
   LIMIT 10;

use:

.. code:: sql

>    SELECT reading_time,reading_value

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   SELECT reading_time, reading_value
```

   FROM device_data

>    WHERE reading_time BETWEEN '2024-12-20' AND '2025-01-01'

Reviewer 2: From what I see, the time range is the only difference. The section's title is "Only sort data when needed", it reads more like a "don't select more data than you need" example. The example could just omit `ORDER BY` entirely, as basically the last sentence before the example suggests?

============================

In many cases, data may be stored in an efficient format, but we want to
transform it to make it more human-readable in the output of the query.
To accomodate such situations, we may use `scalar functions`_ such as
``date_format`` or ``timezone``.

Sometimes queries apply these transformations in an intermediate step and later
do further operations like filtering on the transformed values.

CrateDB's query optimizer attempts to determine the most efficient way to
execute a given query by considering the possible query plans. Based on the
query scenario/situation, it is always aiming to use existing indexes on the
original data for maximum efficiency.

However, there is always a chance that some particular clause in the query
expression prevents the optimizer from selecting an optimal plan, ending up
applying the transformation on thousands or millions of records that later would
be discarded anyway. So, whenever it makes sense, we want to make sure these
transformations are only applied after the database has already worked out the
final result set to be sent back to the client.

So instead of:

.. code:: sql

   WITH mydata AS (
     SELECT

>            date_format(device_data.reading_time) AS formatted_reading_time,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
           DATE_FORMAT(device_data.reading_time) AS formatted_reading_time,
```

           device_data.reading_value
     FROM device_data

>      )

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
)
```

   SELECT *
   FROM mydata
   WHERE formatted_reading_time LIKE '2025%';

use:

.. code:: sql

   SELECT

>      date_format(device_data.reading_time) AS formatted_reading_time,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     DATE_FORMAT(device_data.reading_time) AS formatted_reading_time,
```

     device_data.reading_value
   FROM device_data
   WHERE device_data.reading_time BETWEEN '2025-01-01' AND '2026-01-01'

.. _replace-case:

Replace CASE in expressions used for filtering, JOINs, grouping, etc
====================================================================

It is not always obvious to the optimizer what we may be trying to do with a
``CASE`` expression (see for instance `Shortcut CASE evaluation Issue 16022`_).

If you are using CASE expression for “formatting” see the previous point about

> formatting output as late as possible,
> 
> but if you are using a CASE expression as part of a filter of other operation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
formatting output as late as possible,
but if you are using a CASE expression as part of a filter of other operation
```

consider replacing it with an equivalent expression, for instance:

.. code:: sql

   SELECT SUM(a) as count_greater_than_10,...
   FROM (
     SELECT CASE WHEN field1 > 10 THEN 1 ELSE 0 END
           , ...
     FROM mytable
     ...
   ) subquery
   ...;

can be rewritten as

.. code:: sql

   SELECT COUNT(field1) FILTER (WHERE field1 > 10) as count_greater_than_10
   FROM mytable;

And

.. code:: postgresql

   SELECT *
   FROM mytable
   WHERE
     CASE
           WHEN $1 = 'ALL COUNTRIES' THEN true
           WHEN $1 = mytable.country AND $2 = 'ALL CITIES' THEN true
           ELSE $1 = mytable.country AND $2 = mytable.city
     END;

can be rewritten as

.. code:: postgresql

   SELECT *
   FROM mytable
   WHERE ($1 = 'ALL COUNTRIES')
   OR ($1 = mytable.country AND $2 = 'ALL CITIES')
   OR ($1 = mytable.country AND $2 = mytable.city)

(the exact replacement expressions of course depend on the semantics of each
case)

.. _groups-instead-distinct:

Use groupings instead of DISTINCT
=================================

> (Reference: `Issue 13818`_)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(Reference: `Issue 13818`_)

Instead of
```

.. code:: sql

   SELECT DISTINCT country FROM customers;

use

.. code:: sql

   SELECT country FROM customers GROUP BY country;

and instead of

.. code:: sql

   SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT a) FROM t;

use

.. code:: sql

   SELECT COUNT(a)
   FROM (
           SELECT a
           FROM t
           GROUP BY a

>            ) tmp;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   ) tmp;
```

==================================================================

Consider the following query:

.. code:: sql

   SELECT customerid, SUM(order_amount) AS total
   FROM customer_orders
   GROUP BY customerid;

This looks simple but to execute it CrateDB needs to keep the full result set in
memory for all groups.

If we already know what the groups will be we can use correlated subqueries
instead:

.. code:: sql

   SELECT customerid,
     (SELECT SUM(order_amount)
      FROM customer_orders
      WHERE customer_orders.customerid = customers.customerid
     ) AS total
   FROM customers;

.. _group-large-and-complex-queries:

************************************
 Handling Large and Complex Queries
************************************

This section discusses strategies for breaking down complex operations on large
datasets into manageable steps.

.. _batch-operations:

Batch operations
================

If you need to perform lots of UPDATEs or expensive INSERTs from SELECT, instead
of doing them all in one go, adopt a batch approach where the operations are
done on groups of records each time.

So for instance instead of doing:

.. code:: sql

>    UPDATE mytable SET field1=field1+1;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   UPDATE mytable SET field1 = field1 + 1;
```

do

.. code:: shell

   for id in {1..100}; do

>            crash -c "UPDATE mytable SET field1=field1+1 WHERE customer_id=$id;"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
           crash -c "UPDATE mytable SET field1 = field1 + 1 WHERE customer_id = $id;"
```

However, CrateDB can do a lot better than this if we add an additional condition
like this:

.. code:: sql

   SELECT *
   FROM (
      SELECT UNNEST(my_array_of_objects) obj
      FROM my_table
      WHERE 1 = ANY(my_array_of_objects['field1'])
   ) AS subquery
   WHERE obj['field1'] = 1;

CrateDB leverages indexes to only unnest the relevant records from ``my_table``
which can make a huge difference.

.. _group-efficient-query-structure:

******************************************
 Efficient Query Structure and Constructs
******************************************

This section focuses on optimizing SQL logic by prioritizing efficient syntax
and avoiding redundant operations.

.. _only-sort-when-needed:

Only sort data when needed
==========================

Indexing in CrateDB is optimized to support filtering and aggregations without
requiring expensive defragmentation operations, but it is not optimized for
sorting​.

Maintaining a sorted index would slow down ingestion, that is why​ other
analytical database systems like Cassandra and Redshift make similar
trade-offs​.

This means that when an ``ORDER BY`` operation is requested, the whole dataset

> needs to be loaded into the main memory on the relevant cluster node to be sorted.

Reviewer 3: This isn't correct as CrateDB will push down any ``ORDER BY` as much as possible, in best case using an optimized lucene collector. Additional, intermediated node based ordering is applied and results from nodes are merged by a sorted merge on the handler node.

That is why it is important to not request ``ORDER BY`` operations when not actually
needed, and most importantly, not on tables of large cardinalities without aggregating
records beforehand. On the other hand, of course it is no problem to sort a few
thousand rows in the final stage of a ``SELECT`` operation, but we need to avoid

> requesting sort operations over millions of rows.

Author: Is the case of the straightforward column references actually optimized in a way that we would not want to have this paragraph? the scenario we have in mind here is the `ORDER BY ts DESC LIMIT 100` from https://github.com/crate/crate/issues/16782

           ) tmp;

.. _subqueries-instead-groups:

Use subqueries instead of GROUP BY if the groups are already known
==================================================================

Consider the following query:

.. code:: sql

   SELECT customerid, SUM(order_amount) AS total
   FROM customer_orders
   GROUP BY customerid;

This looks simple but to execute it CrateDB needs to keep the full result set in
memory for all groups.

If we already know what the groups will be we can use correlated subqueries
instead:

.. code:: sql

   SELECT customerid,
     (SELECT SUM(order_amount)
      FROM customer_orders
      WHERE customer_orders.customerid = customers.customerid
     ) AS total
   FROM customers;

.. _group-large-and-complex-queries:

************************************
 Handling Large and Complex Queries
************************************

This section discusses strategies for breaking down complex operations on large
datasets into manageable steps.

.. _batch-operations:

Batch operations
================

If you need to perform lots of UPDATEs or expensive INSERTs from SELECT, instead
of doing them all in one go, adopt a batch approach where the operations are

> done on groups of records each time.

Reviewer 3: What is the reason to do this? CrateDB uses an internal batching and throttling logic to run this in the most efficient way. Is there an issue with this?

Reviewer: Maybe it should better read/say "[...] instead of invoking individual queries, please consider adopting a batch approach [...]"?

example.

.. _udf-right-context:

Be mindful of UDFs, leverage them in the right contexts, but only in the right contexts
=======================================================================================

When using user-defined functions (UDFs), two important details relevant for
performance aspects need to be considered.

#. Once values are processed by an UDF, the database engine will load results
   into memory, and will not be able to leverage indexes on the underlying
   fields any longer. In this spirit, please apply the relevant general
   considerations about delaying formatting as much as possible.

#. UDFs run on a JavaScript virtual machine on a single thread, so they can have
   an impact on performance, because relevant operations can not be
   parallelized.

However, some operations may be more straightforward to do in JavaScript than
SQL.

.. _group-filter-expression-optimizations:

This section discusses expressions that improve filter efficiency and handling
of specific data Structures.

************************************
 Filter and Expression Optimization
************************************

.. _positive-filters:

> Prefer positive filter expressions to negative filter expressions

Reviewer 3: Is this really called like that? Isn't this more popular as "Avoid expression negation"`

Author: Neither "negative filter expressions" nor "expression negation" seems particularly popular.
I changed the title to "Avoid expression negation in filters" now.
The underlying and more comprehensive technical concept is [sargability](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sargable), but I think we probably just want to keep it simple.

   SELECT customerid, country
   FROM customers;

.. _minimise-result-sets:

Avoid large result sets
=======================

Be aware of the number of rows you are returning in a ``SELECT`` query.
Analytical databases, such as CrateDB, excel at processing large data sets and
returning small to medium-sized result sets. Serializing, transporting them over
the network, and deserializing large result sets is expensive. When dealing with
large result sets in the range of several hundred thousand records, consider
whether your application needs the whole result set at once. Use :ref:`cursors
<server-side-cursor>` or ``LIMIT``/``OFFSET`` to fetch data in batches.

See also `Fetching large result sets from CrateDB`_ for examples.

.. _propagate-limit:

Propagate LIMIT clauses when applicable
=======================================

Similarly to the above, we may have for instance a ``LIMIT 10`` at the end of
the query and to get there it may have been sufficient to only pull 10 records
(or some other number of records) at an earlier stage from some given table. If
that is the case duplicate or move (depending on the specific query) the
``LIMIT`` clause to the relevant place.

> In some cases, we may not know how many rows we need in the intermediate working

Reviewer 4: It is a long sentence. Breaking it up could ease reading it.

> In some cases, we may not know how many rows we need in the intermediate working sets but we know that there will be 10 records on the last day. Doing filtering early will help the optimizer and can protect the database from accidentally processing years of data. By not filtering early, the load on your cluster will increase tremendously.

like this:

.. code:: sql

   SELECT *
   FROM (
      SELECT UNNEST(my_array_of_objects) obj
      FROM my_table
      WHERE 1 = ANY(my_array_of_objects['field1'])
   ) AS subquery
   WHERE obj['field1'] = 1;

CrateDB leverages indexes to only unnest the relevant records from ``my_table``
which can make a huge difference.

.. _group-efficient-query-structure:

******************************************
 Efficient Query Structure and Constructs
******************************************

This section focuses on optimizing SQL logic by prioritizing efficient syntax
and avoiding redundant operations.

.. _only-sort-when-needed:

Only sort data when needed
==========================

Indexing in CrateDB is optimized to support filtering and aggregations without
requiring expensive defragmentation operations, but it is not optimized for
sorting​.

Maintaining a sorted index would slow down ingestion, that is why​ other
analytical database systems like Cassandra and Redshift make similar
trade-offs​.

This means that when an ``ORDER BY`` operation is requested, the whole dataset
needs to be loaded into the main memory on the relevant cluster node to be

> sorted. That is why it is important to not request ``ORDER BY`` operations when

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
sorted. For this reason, it is important to not request ``ORDER BY`` operations when
```

   LIMIT 10;

use:

.. code:: sql

   SELECT reading_time, reading_value
   FROM device_data
   WHERE reading_time BETWEEN '2024-12-20' AND '2025-01-01'
   ORDER BY reading_time DESC
   LIMIT 10;

.. _format-as-last-step:

Format output as a last step
============================

In many cases, data may be stored in an efficient format, but we want to
transform it to make it more human-readable in the output of the query. To
accomodate such situations, we may use `scalar functions`_ such as
``date_format`` or ``timezone``.

Sometimes queries apply these transformations in an intermediate step and later
do further operations like filtering on the transformed values.

CrateDB's query optimizer attempts to determine the most efficient way to
execute a given query by considering the possible query plans. Based on the
query scenario/situation, it is always aiming to use existing indexes on the
original data for maximum efficiency.

However, there is always a chance that some particular clause in the query
expression prevents the optimizer from selecting an optimal plan, ending up
applying the transformation on thousands or millions of records that later would

> be discarded anyway. So, whenever it makes sense, we want to make sure these

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
be discarded anyway. So, whenever it makes sense, we want to ensure these
```

   GROUP BY deviceid;

.. _staging-tables:

Use staging tables for intermediate results if you are doing a lot of JOINs
===========================================================================

If you have many CTEs or VIEWs with a need to JOIN them, it can be benefical to
query them individually, store intermediate results into dedicated tables, and
then use these tables for JOINing.

While there is a cost in writing to disk and reading data back, the whole
operation can benefit from indexing and from giving the optimizer more
straightforward execution plans, to enable it optimizing for better parallel
execution using multiple cluster nodes.

.. _group-schema-and-function-optimization:

**********************************
 Schema and Function Optimization
**********************************

This section focuses on schema design and function usage to streamline
performance.

.. _consider-generated-columns:

Consider generated columns
==========================

If you frequently find yourself extracting information from fields and then
using this extracted data on filters or aggregations, it can be good to consider

> doing this operation on ingestion with a `generated column`_, this way the value

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
doing this operation on ingestion with a `generated column`_ . In this way the value
```

we need for filtering and aggregations can be indexed. This involves a trade-off
between storage space and query performance, evaluate the frequency and
execution times of these queries with the additional storage requirements of
storing the generated value.

See `Using regex comparisons and other features for inspection of logs`_ for an
example.

.. _udf-right-context:

Be mindful of UDFs, leverage them in the right contexts, but only in the right contexts
=======================================================================================

When using user-defined functions (UDFs), two important details relevant for
performance aspects need to be considered.

#. Once values are processed by an UDF, the database engine will load results
   into memory, and will not be able to leverage indexes on the underlying
   fields any longer. In this spirit, please apply the relevant general
   considerations about delaying formatting as much as possible.

#. UDFs run on a JavaScript virtual machine on a single thread, so they can have

>    an impact on performance, because relevant operations can not be

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   an impact on performance as relevant operations can not be
```

************************************
 Filter and Expression Optimization
************************************

.. _positive-filters:

Avoid expression negation in filters
====================================

Positive filter expressions can directly leverage indexing. With negative
expressions, the optimizer may be able to still use indexes, but this may not
always happen and the optimizer might not rewrite the query optimally.
Explicitly using positive conditions removes ambiguity and ensures the most
efficient path is chosen.

So instead of:

.. code:: sql

   SELECT
     customerid,
     status
   FROM customers_table
   WHERE NOT (customerid <= 2) AND NOT (status = 'inactive');

We can rewrite this as:

.. code:: sql

   SELECT
     customerid,
     status
   FROM customers_table
   WHERE customerid > 3 AND status = 'active';

.. _use-null-or-empty:

Use the special null_or_empty function with OBJECTs and ARRAYs when relevant
============================================================================

CrateDB has a special scalar function called null_or_empty_ , using this in
filter conditions against OBJECTs and ARRAYs is much faster than using an ``IS

> NULL`` clause, if accepting empty objects and arrays is acceptable.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
NULL`` clause, if allowing empty objects and arrays is acceptable.
```

accomodate such situations, we may use `scalar functions`_ such as
``date_format`` or ``timezone``.

Sometimes queries apply these transformations in an intermediate step and later
do further operations like filtering on the transformed values.

CrateDB's query optimizer attempts to determine the most efficient way to
execute a given query by considering the possible query plans. Based on the
query scenario/situation, it is always aiming to use existing indexes on the
original data for maximum efficiency.

However, there is always a chance that some particular clause in the query
expression prevents the optimizer from selecting an optimal plan, ending up
applying the transformation on thousands or millions of records that later would
be discarded anyway. So, whenever it makes sense, we want to ensure these
transformations are only applied after the database has already worked out the
final result set to be sent back to the client.

So instead of:

.. code:: sql

   WITH mydata AS (
     SELECT
           DATE_FORMAT(device_data.reading_time) AS formatted_reading_time,
           device_data.reading_value
     FROM device_data

> )

Reviewer: This will fix the build error.
```suggestion
   )
```
